delivering/environments.md, before:

---
parent: How We Deliver
---
# Environments

- Each has its own purpose and are deployed independently from each other (e.g. separate servers, DBs, etc).
- Each gets a fresh deployment of new code once the automated tests for that particular commit pass.


## CI

|            |                                                                                                                                  |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Git Branch | `main` or `master`                                                                                                               |
| Purpose    | Functional testing of recently merged code in a more production-like environment prior to being included in a release candidate. |
| When       | Testing is at engineer discretion and is recommended if you haven't been able to fully test locally.                             |


## RC

|            |                                                                                                                                        |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Git Branch | `release-candidate`                                                                                                                    |
| Purpose    | Functional testing by engineers prior to production deployment.<br/>Acceptance testing by stakeholders.<br/>Demonstration environment. |
| When       | Testing is **required** before the code can be released.                                                                               |

## Production

|            |                                                                |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Git Branch | `release`                                                      |
| Purpose    | Environment for end users.                                     |
| When       | Occasional smoke testing may be required, particularly after . |

Commit message:

Update release and environment details (#63)
* Update release and environment details

* Update delivering/release-process/index.md

Co-authored-by: Peter Pinch <pdpinch+github@hawklake.com>

* Update delivering/release-process/index.md

Co-authored-by: Peter Pinch <pdpinch+github@hawklake.com>

* Update delivering/release-process/webapp-release-process.md

Co-authored-by: Peter Pinch <pdpinch+github@hawklake.com>

---------

Co-authored-by: Peter Pinch <pdpinch+github@hawklake.com>

delivering/environments.md, after:

---
parent: How We Deliver
---
# Environments

- Each environment is deployed independently (e.g. separate servers, DBs, etc).
- Each environment deploys new code included in the release once the automated tests for that particular release-commit pass successfully.

## Environment Name

|              |                                                      |
|--------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Git Branch   | The Github branch that the environment has deployed. |
| Purpose      | The purpose of the environment.                      |
| Expectations | Expectations for environment usage and processes.    |


## CI

|              |                                                                                                                                    |
|--------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Git Branch   | `main` or `master`                                                                                                                 |
| Purpose      | Testing code from `main` or `master` in a deployed environment prior to being included in a release candidate and release process. |
| Expectations | Code is tested and functionality confirmed shortly after releasing to CI.                                                          |


## RC

|              |                                                                                                                           |
|--------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Git Branch   | `release-candidate`                                                                                                       |
| Purpose      | Functional testing prior to production deployment.<br/>Acceptance testing by stakeholders.<br/>Demonstration environment. |
| Expectations | Mock data can be created.  Some risk is acceptable by deploying code that cannot be tested locally by a developer.        |

## Production

|              |                                                                                |
|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Git Branch   | `release`                                                                      |
| Purpose      | Environment for end users.                                                     |
| Expectations | Limit creation of mock data.  Code and functionality should pose minimal risk. |
